Meeting Title: Meet (David Reich)
Date: Feb 22
Meeting participants: David Reich555, Reich, David Emil

Transcript:
 
Me: Hey, david. How's it going? So I can't hear you.  
Them: Do you hear me now?  
Me: Y. Ep. How's it going?  
Them: Good. Yeah, it's fine here now, but apparently they think we're going to have a snow.  
Me: Yeah. Testing, testing.  
Them: Okay. Are you there? Let me move here. Okay? I'm ready now.  
Me: Okay, great. Your office look beautiful. I think it looked better than I was expecting, so I think it'll be a great place to film.  
Them: Yeah. I think if someone passes outside, like Daniel Taven, if he comes in and sort of tries to. He always just. I will get distracted if some people come in. But if I just face the other way, it will be okay.  
Me: Great. Okay. Sweet. Okay. Thanks for making the time to talk today. I guess, given the delay in the interview, it didn't need to be ascended. But I appreciate you making the time. I feel like I'm decently prepped from reading the papers on the methodology of previous methods and what you did, although I'm sure there's still a bunch that would be shorter discuss, but the thing I feel will be. Maybe the part that's most interesting to the audience, that I don't feel I have a good grasp on right now is the implications of this result. And of other results on our understanding of the last 10,000 years of history. Which would you need to bring in? Why was selection for things like lactase persistence strongest during the Bronze Age and not earlier or later? Why is this happening? Or what does that tell us about what kind of environments? We were seeing something closer to. Well, what does this actually tell us about history is I'd love. To use this call to do somewhat of a rundown on of further resources. Or ideas to look more into.  
Them: Sure. So did you get a chance to look at any of the E.M. matheson papers?  
Me: Yeah, yeah.  
Them: So Em's work is pretty. Talks about this in various ways. So what we see in our data is that there is a lot more directional natural selection adaptation in this time period than there was in previous time periods, and that it was accelerating even during the period that we're talking about. So with the evidence for selection becoming more strong in the last 5,000 years of the transect compared to the first 5,000 years of the transect. So first of all, the whole period is different from earlier periods, and secondly, it's becoming more intensive, these processes later in the time course. So this is a really eventful period in human history, or at least in the history of this part of the world. People start living completely differently. They are eating completely different things, very much simpler things. So instead of a very mixed diet, they're eating monocultures of certain types of foods that they're growing and much less meat in their diet. Often, and in some cases. And they're starting to live at massively higher population densities. Which keep getting higher and higher over time by orders of magnitude. And they're starting to live close to animals that they're beginning to raise, who they communicate diseases with. So I don't know if I'm answering your question or not.  
Me: So on that point, I don't know if it was the fasting paper or a different one or one of them, which was like saying that. The genetic effect on stature is quite limited. Sorry. Let me make sure I remember. Sorry. That's irrelevant. Maybe more so. Like, didn't he, like, measure femurs and find that there weren't that much shorter? During this period. And so does that suggest that at the beginning of agriculture was less bad than the description you're giving would imply?  
Them: I don't know if it was bad or not. It was just different. So Everett Fight has been sort of a major subject of sort of people thinking about sort of the impact of natural selection. There's multiple papers about it, some of which I sort of gave you references to.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah.  
Them: And there was a theory that the beginning of agriculture, or at least shortly after the transition to agriculture, there's evidence of people being under sort of physical stress in the area to a greater extent than in earlier hunter gatherer periods. There's sort of higher rates of sort of lesions on the skeleton that are associated with childhood stress and so on and so forth. And in some populations, there's measurements of shorter femur length, for example. The problem is there's many problems with this, one of which is that the ancestry of these people in Europe changed dramatically. And so it could be a genetic effect. It could be an effect if people having worse nutrition and different types of food and so on. And I think that one of the Ian's paper, the paper with Sam Cox and colleagues was showing that actually, you actually even have cases where people with the same genetic background, early European farmers and like the Balkans and in Central Europe have actually very different sexual dimorphism with respect to height. So there's a male female difference.  
Me: Y. Eah.  
Them: In one place, but there's not a strong male female difference in the other. But genetically, they're identical. And they have this speculative, crazy interpretation that may be right, which is that there's actually much more sexual sex inequality in one place than in the other. In times of famine, the women are starved in one. Place and the men are treated okay, but in the other place, both men and women are starved equally. And therefore you don't see sexual dimorphism because to the same extent, even though the genetic background is the same. So, I mean, this is sort of like a long way of saying that I don't. Know if height is the best readout. Of natural selection in this time period. It's one that people have been super interested in because we actually can study the phenotype, the traits in people in the past, because we have their skeletons. So we can actually see what their real height was, not just their genetically predicted height. What this whole paper that we're talking about this week is about. It's not about their actual traits, it's about their genetic prediction of their traits and how that's changed over time under the pressure of natural selection. Fight itself doesn't seem to be under very strong directional selection at all. We don't get any know in our study.  
Me: Y.  
Them: Of height, directional selection. We get evidence that the individual variants are moving up and down in unusual extent, but they're kind of canceling each other, some up, some down, and they overall, they stay about the same in terms of their genetic prediction in this time period.  
Me: Eah. So this is one thing I wanted to clarify. It sounds like there's these 279 low tide that you're confident are under directional selection or like have these allele frequencies that are only explained by so actually. But then separately it seems like there's also this question of like of the Sorry, I'm butchering. I'm definitely getting this wrong, but I just want to say my wrong thing so you can clarify where with the actual methodologies.  
Them: Let's keep talking about it until you feel more confident.  
Me: Yeah. But then I guess out of the 8,000 or so that you're. You can't explain. Through the GRM from drift and bottlenecks and whatever. Of those 8,000, you're seeing directional changes. Look like that are correlated with or. Yeah, alleles that are correlated with, you know, behavioral or cognitive traits in gwas. I guess I wanted to understand. Do we see traits for behavioral, cognitive things? Yeah. Where are we seeing that is. Is that like, you can't find an individual locale that clearly have an effect on it, but you see it more directional shift. Like, how should I understand that?  
Them: Okay, there's multiple things going on here, so one of them is what's significant and what's not. Another of them is. There's multiple ideas here. So one of them is, how many signals of selection do we observe?  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: And there's the 479 that are 99% probability or more and probably independent of each other. And then there's the 7,800 or so that are 50% or more probability. And then there's an even larger number that. Will contain many, many thousands more that have appreciable probabilities. So there's, like, how many sites are under directional selection by this particular test, Given the power we have. The truth is that despite 16,000 individuals we've analyzed, of course we have limited power and we haven't detected. There's like a mother load of additional sites that we haven't detected. We don't have power to detect. So going to your question regarding behavioral traits like psychosis, like schizophrenia, bipolar disease, or these various measures of cognitive performance, like number of years of school and various things like this, If you actually look at mental, psychiatric, behavioral traits, they don't actually show very strong enrichment in signals of selection. There's a plot in our paper that you noticed which shows that there's huge enrichment for immune traits.  
Me: Y.  
Them: But there's not much enrichment at all for these other traits. So that's very confusing because a lot of our polygenic signals show enrichment for behavioral traits. That's actually a lot of the hits are for behavioral traits. So it seems contradictory, but it's not, and I will show you why. This is not what we would do in a conversation, obviously, but I will nevertheless show you why. So let me.  
Me: Eah. We could do this in a conversation. Like, I think it's a. It's. It's a. It's offered me a. Helpful to be. Or, you know, we could overlay images and whatever to the extent that it's helpful to the audience.  
Them: I see. Okay, so let me show you this because it's actually quite interesting. Extended data, figure 6.  
Me: I can pull it up as well.  
Them: I forget how to share on Google Meet. Where's the share thing?  
Me: At the very bottom Share Screen Middle bottom.  
Them: Did I succeed?  
Me: Yes.  
Them: Okay? So you see something here. You see, like, a colorful rain dog, like, plot, right?  
Me: Y. Eah. Yeah.  
Them: So what? This is. Is. The heritability enrichment signal. And if you look at this, The red, right? So the red is very strong. So if you look in the dark red,  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: These are sites that are amongst the 479. They're very, very strong signals of.  
Me: Wasn't it? 279.  
Them: What? 407.  
Me: Was it? Was it? Was it okay? I'm sorry. Yeah, I thought it was. Was it 279 or 479?  
Them: Oh. What version of the paper are you looking at?  
Me: The one I got on bioarchive.  
Them: I see there's an update. I'll send it to you.  
Me: Okay, I got it.  
Them: There's just, like. We should work with the updated number as we. There's an updated version.  
Me: Yeah. Okay? Yeah.  
Them: Thanks for. Okay, good. So this is like the latest version that we just resubmitted in its third round that basically is now accepted, so. If you look at this. Red plot. Red dot. These are the ones that pass that are amongst the 479 and you can ask the question of whether they are enriched for contributing to various genome wide association studies like for immune traits or for metabolic traits that for example affect type 2 diabetes or for behavioral traits or for mental psychiatric traits. What you see is there's no enrichment for psychiatric traits. That's what you were talking about.  
Me: Y. Eah.  
Them: But there is strong enrichment for immune traits, obviously, like, huge. However, if you look at weaker and weaker thresholds for genome wide significance, it doesn't have to be 99% probable, it only has to be 50% probable or 20% probable. But you have many, many more sites to work with. You still see enrichments not as extreme for immune, but it does the opposite for mental psychiatric traits. It goes up. This goes down and this goes up. Do you see that? And also for behavioral traits, which is also psychological, this goes up. And the qualitative behavior is sort of like, somewhat different for immune traits. And we discussed this in the paper, and the reason we think this is happening is because we know actually a lot about the nature of behavioral and psychiatric traits, and they're much more what's called polygenic. So if you actually look at the genes that contribute to immune traits. The manifestation of the trait in the person will overwhelmingly be due to dozens of positions in genome. But if you look at schizophrenia, there's thousands.  
Me: Y.  
Them: And they all have teeny, tiny effects. It's real. But they have teeny tiny effects on schizophrenia. So what actually happens is for immune traits, all of these effects are known and their genome wide significance and the genome wide association study. And they're also strongly selected, and that's what you're seeing here.  
Me: Eah.  
Them: But for psychiatric traits. The signals are so weak. But real that actually were not detecting them at genome wide significance. And actually, you need to go down to very weak signals. To begin to actually detect them. And so, given the limited power, we have only 16,000 people. It would change if we had 100,000 people. What happens is that we only detect these signals as we move into the bulk of the distribution. But they're there, and it's clear, you see, the standard errors are. Getting small because there's so much more data. And so what's actually happening is that you're not comparing apples to oranges here. Immune traits are oligogenic. Relatively small number of variants contributing to the traits. Behavioral traits are known to be highly polygenic, and therefore the signal that matters to us is in the weak effects. We pick them up in our polygenic score analysis. When we are looking at lots of variants combined together, but we don't pick it up in the single variant analysis, which is what this is, and therefore it's not a contradiction, we're actually seeing that. We're seeing heritage. We're seeing heritability for weaker effects in the polygenic score analysis.  
Me: I guess there's. Unless a misunderstanding of, like. Why does the enrichment go down as the effect or your sort of confidence in that site being under selection goes up? Because, like, you're naively I would expect, you know, the less confident you are, the less likely it is that it is actually being selected. And the less likely it is actually being selected, the less it should be like. The less it should be correlated with an important thing that's being under, like a trait that's being under selection. Which makes sense with the immune thing, right? Where it's like, oh, this is definitely, like, contributes to immunity and, like, it's clearly extremely strongly intersection, whereas this one might or might not. And it's. You can see that effect.  
Them: Right. Can you repeat your question even though you said it very clearly?  
Me: I don't think I did. So with immunesh, it seems like there's a reason that the slope goes up. And that's because, okay, if you're really confident that this locus is, like, super relevant for immune function, Because of GWAS data. It, like, makes sense why those are definitely going to be under selection. Whereas of all the locuses that might or may not be under selection, some of them or, sorry. All the sites that might or might not be contributing to immune function. It makes sense that, like, some of them will be intersection, some of them won't, because some of them are just not relevant. And so to make sense, like, why those two things are correlated and you see an upward graph, and I'm curious why. You're not seeing the same thing in the other traits. Why, there's like a downward.  
Them: Right. Are you curious about the pattern seen in immunity? Are you curious about the pattern seen in behavior? So behavior immunity is upward sloping. The more stringent you go, the stronger the effect becomes. And behavior is downward sloping.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah, I'm more curious about the downward slapping.  
Them: Like what you see in.  
Me: Like. Why is it that. Why is it dark shell? Thing.  
Them: For behavior.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Right. So let me first talk about upward sloping. The reason that you do get an upward slope is that as you go down, as you lower your thresholds, and not 100% probability for it being real, 50% probability for being real, or 25%, probably you're diluting your signal.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Because there's a lot of junk starting to enter your signal. So the truth is that it's fivefold elevated, but when you're looking at 25% false positive rate, you drop it by a quarter, something like that. So that makes sense that it's upwards sloping because you're just diluting. It by noise. By jump. In the other case, you're still diluting by noise.  
Me: Right.  
Them: But there's such a powerful signal. Associated with the weak effects. Because it's so polygenic that that noise is overcompensated by a massive real signal is starting to appear. At lower thresholds. So there's two countervailing effects. One is where the real signal is and the real signal is at weak effects. For behavior. And the real signal is that for strong effects, for immunity. And so you need to lower your threshold to capture the weak effects. And that such a powerful thing that you actually get a downward sloping rather than an upper slope.  
Me: Makes sense. Okay. And then stepping back just in terms of a Cecil for the interview, it's interesting to me that, like, it might actually be worth delving into the figures. And during the interview. So just. And obviously, the audience would be able to see an overlay of the figures and everything. So I'll think about. I don't know if you have a sense of, like, which figure. It would be good to.  
Them: Well, I mean, have you seen. Have you seen a version of me giving a talk on this work to an academic audience?  
Me: No, I would love to see that, actually. That would be incredibly useful.  
Them: Because, I mean, I gave one. 2 days ago or something. In Copenhagen and I've given this one in various places. So let me see. Michigan. So I gave this at the University of Michigan. And let me see. Let me see where I gave this. There may be an online version of it. I doubt it, actually, but I can check.  
Me: And if not, I wonder if I can Reich, out to any of the places you have given the talk to see if they've recorded it. And. Get a copy.  
Them: Yeah. I'm just looking at my recent talk. So. I mean, I gave a half hour talk at the American Society of Human Genetics. I don't know if that would have been recorded. It's not as long as the one I just gave, but it's sort of polished. Can't. Can't find it online. Okay? So. Okay? Sorry you've disappeared. There still. Okay? Yeah. I could just give you this talk. I mean, like one on one audience. But I will show you my slides. Anyway. I don't know if this is helpful. So you're here now? Yeah. And then. So this is like my talk that I gave two days ago. And I start by talking about the jump and the amount of data that's available, which you know about. And then I talk about. The mainstream view is that then that selection has been quiescent in the last 10,000 years, and I quote, This paper by Rein Hernandez and also talk about the Cupel papers. And I talk about the sasha cassav blog. That sort of was sort of trying to make sense of this. I talked about the small number of discoveries. Of selection in beginning in 2015, the hope was that we would have many hundreds, given the rapid increase in the amount of data. But it asymptote and it didn't look like there was a huge jump, and in some ways, this was quite disappointing. That despite even in 2024 there was very little found. So we have this new method that we're simply asking whether a non zero slope of the selection coefficient predicts allele frequency more than population structure alone. We have this 14 fold increase in sample size with more than 10,000 individuals reported in a single study. Largest previous study was fewer than 800. And then we do this very rigorous data cleaning, which is very important. And then when you apply this, we have 479. Estimated genome wide significant signals of selection confident at more than 99%. And we thought this had to be wrong when we got this result a few years ago. And we carried out simulations. Which it might be worth going into. And this is not in the bioarchive preprint because it appeared in the subsequent year. Showing that this was real. And what we did is this is in the preprint, which is that as you slide your selection statistic upward, the enrichment for real signal becomes extreme. So if you look in the UK Biobank, which is this study of hundreds of thousands of white British people, and you look at 452 traits, things like height and blood pressure and different diseases and things like that, The UK Biobank will look at 10 million positions, the same 10 million ones that we're analyzing. And it will assign whether each of those variances significant in one of those 452 studies. So of those 10 million positions, As many as 15% of them. About 15% of them are significant in at least one of these 452 UK Biobank studies. So once you have that, you can ask. Okay, if you take a random position in the genome, it's 15%. But as you slide your selection statistic upward, it becomes starts becoming more than 15%. If you're selecting statistic is one or selection statistic is two or selection statistic is three, there's a twofold enrichment. And what's actually happening here is that your UK Biobank data set is telling you about an independent line of evidence about whether these are functional or not, because it's studies in modern people. Them studies in modern people don't know about the selection coefficient. And so that we're estimating. So, given that we have a strong selection coefficient when you slide it above five and a half, There is a plateau and there's a fivefold enrichment. It's like 60 or 70% of these signals are actually associated to some gain and wide association study. So it's kind of amazing. Like we did this thing looking at changes over time and just knowing that increases the odds that it's associated. To some trait. Like a completely different line of information from 15% up to 60 or 70%, and then it plateaus above this point. And so we interpret how far you are from one fold enrichment to like 60 or 70% enrichment as the probability that things real. So over here it's about 50% probability of real and there's 7,800 locations at this point. Or more so.  
Me: But why is that 50%. Why 50% then why not like a different number?  
Them: Well, because.  
Me: Just because it's, like, halfway up the curve.  
Them: It's halfway up the curve. So the way we're thinking about this curve is that over here, everything's new.  
Me: Up there is 99% okay.  
Them: Right? So, like, as you increase the selection statistic more, it doesn't increase the enrichment further because everything's real. And the reason it's lower here is half of its junk.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: So in half of it's not real. So we're using this independent line of evidence, whether it's associated with DWAs as basically a probability of junk readout, and here it's 50%.  
Me: And the 479 are the ones at the very top.  
Them: These are the ones at the very top.  
Me: And then, like, there's some 7,000 that are, like, right above one.  
Them: There are 7,000 that are above this point.  
Me: Oh, I see.  
Them: Seven thousand. Eight that you know that are 50% probability of being real.  
Me: Y. Eah.  
Them: So then what we did in the last year through the review process is we simulated all sorts of processes, like realistic population history and, like, different types of natural selection. Selection against variation, you know, because most new variation is bad, but it's not directional or selection to remove variation in the population. This is known as stabilizing selection. And those are the black lines. They don't even produce a hint of this type of enrichment that we observe in real data. But when you have directional selection. You get this type of pattern, it's 40 fold rather than fivefold, but that's just because of a fraction of the genome we assumed was selected in the simulation. So that's very encouraging. And then we did something else, which is probably not worth going into our discussion, but it's a completely independent line of evidence, which is if we know from it's not based on genome wide association studies, but we know that if there's directional natural selection and only in directional natural selection, if you look in a genomic area around a selected position, the squared frequencies of the variance are going to go up. Transiently while the selection sweep up is happening. And only in that case. And so we see a rise again, plateauing or getting to a very high value, around five and a half of this. It's not genome wide association study, but it's only expected for directional selection. And then we again simulated it. And we again, see all these other types of selection don't produce a rise, but we see a rise. So this is extremely encouraging. And then I talk about we're in a period of intensified selection. And I show this plot, which is you've seen, which I think in some form, which is that given that you're selected, there's enriched heritability for selection. So there's like four or five fold enrichment for immune traits, nothing for psychiatric and behavioral traits. And this is actually a third line of evidence that this is real because.  
Me: Y.  
Them: You wouldn't expect. Like if you had a selection statistic would have that was false positive. It would have such very different patterns for different biological classes of traits.  
Me: Eah. What is biomarkers? Mean?  
Them: Your level of C reactive protein, which is a risk factor for heart disease, or IL6 is another risk factor for heart disease. Various stuff you measure in blood when you do a complete blood count.  
Me: I see. Yeah. Right. Got it. Okay. Is the interpretation that behavioral and mental and cognitive traits have not been under selection.  
Them: No, that's what we talked about before. This is the same as the rainbow plot I told you about before, but simply to be more digestible.  
Me: Yeah. Got it. Yeah. Yeah. These are just the ones that. Yeah, makes sense. This is the polish or anything.  
Them: These are the ones that pass clean and wide significance.  
Me: Yeah, it makes sense.  
Them: And if we were instead using ones that only were like 20% probability of being real, These would actually be higher and these would be lower.  
Me: Okay, but I don't mean to exhaust the things we'll talk about during the episode, but, like, isn't the.  
Them: Do our cash. We can repeat anything. This is like going through the topic and that you don't have to exhaust it. We can have the same conversation again.  
Me: Okay? Great.  
Them: And this is a topic, unless this is really new research for me, and I don't know if I'll come off as smoothly on this topic as I did on the other topic, just because I've written 100 papers on that topic and I've only written two on this topic. But that's fine.  
Me: Yeah. I guess if the risk is, like, eliminating false positives. But if on average any junk falls positive, we'll either have like seem to have be correlated with. Sorry, let me think what I'm trying to say. Like. Suppose you included the thousands of. Included of the thousands of sites which have like, 20% probability of being under selection. The junk shouldn't seem to have any effect on, shouldn't be enriched for like, or they shouldn't have, like, higher probability of being in the GWAS for cognitive traits, whereas, like, the signal should. And so the junk would just like, sort of, Sorry, this is really clumsy way of, but, like, shouldn't. That jump sort of, like, cancel each other out. So can't you just include all the sites going back to, like, 28 percentile probability, 20% probability of being real, and then still the ones that actually matter will, like, adapt to the signal, but the ones that don't want.  
Them: Yes and no. There's two countervailing processes. One is that the junk just dilutes these enrichments down to one. So as you go down to 20% probability, something that's in truth fivefold will go down to one fold.  
Me: I see. Yeah. Yeah.  
Them: Or twofold or something like this. And the other process is that as you're looking at the 20% probability of being real, you're detecting weaker selection coefficients, which actually also implies weaker is correlated to the effect size in the GWAs, and the effect sizes for mental psychiatric traits are much smaller than the effect sizes for immune traits. And there's weak effect size, there's a low probability of detection in a gwas. And so what's happening is that.  
Me: Makes sense.  
Them: The real signal for behavioral traits is in weak effect sizes. And so you're not sampling that real signal. When you do very when you're requiring genome wide significance. Thresholds. I think it's saying something about the way that traits are built that systematically different between behavioral traits and immune traits.  
Me: Yet. That's very interesting.  
Them: It's extremely interesting. What we're talking about right now is speculative. This was a major point of contention for months with the reviewers and we don't really know the answer. The reviewers were, and including co authors of our paper were saying this can't be right. One thing, this is a red flag. One class of trait goes up, the other class of trait goes down. This must be a problem. We now think it's not a problem, but we're not sure that we have exactly the right answer. So I'm happy to talk about it in our discussion, but it's actually something we really don't understand. But your listeners. Our listeners will be confused about it if they listen very carefully. Because on the one hand, we'll be telling them there's this huge enrichment for immune traits and no enrichment. For psychiatric traits. On the other hand, toward the end of the discussion, we may talk about lots of psychiatric and behavioral traits, so it's confusing.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.  
Them: But I think the solution seems to be that the behavioral trait signals are being picked up with polygenic analysis, but they're not being picked up by single variant analysis such as is being shown.  
Me: Makes sense. Yeah, that makes sense.  
Them: The next thing that I showed is we're in a period of intensified selection. There's these enrichments for the very strong effect sizes. What we can do is we can compare across time periods and you could compare, like the Bronze Age, like In the last 5,000 years or so, to the earlier periods. What you see is that there's a significant intensification of signal. The magnitudes of selection coefficients become detectively stronger for the strong effect categories. So for, like, biomarkers and blood, immune, inflammatory and cardiometabolic. So what this is telling you is that selection strengths are not constant. Over time, they're increasing. And so these last 10,000 years, especially the last 5,000 years, it's a period when there's selection intensifying, and that. May help to explain why previous studies found no evidence of classic selective sweeps. Because actually we were in a period of environment not changing as much. And now in this part of the world, West Eurasia, environments have changed a lot. And the biology has reacted to that by changing the frequencies of genetic variants. And that's not the only and then you don't see a signal for mental and behavioral. But I would ignore that because I think that's just a power issue. I think there's probably a change too. And then the other thing, though, it's not the only reason that you didn't see fixed positions across populations. Sorry. It's not the only reason why there's evidence of no selective sweeps in the last few hundred thousand years. The other reason is that actually selection is not only intensified, it's fluctuated. So if you look at these individual 479positions, about a third of them. Two thirds of them are here, which means that the age at which the mutation arose, which we can estimate based on patterns of nearby variation, is an order of magnitude older than the actual age that they would be if the new mutation had arisen and then just been under the selection coefficient we estimate for the whole time of its existence. So what this means is that the selection must have changed over time. It must have intensified recently or even gone in the opposite direction. Because the red ones here are ones where the positive selection is for the ancient mutation. So the ancient mutation is the original one. A new one arose, the derived one, and then the ancient. One was selected positively again. So two thirds of the data, including this one third here. This two thirds has been actually going up and down over time. And so that's another reason why you haven't seen things that have gone 100% difference in frequency across populations. Because on the time scale, we're looking at 10,000 years, which is relatively short on the timescale of human history, which is millions of years. These variants are going up and down. And up and down in different environments. In this particular epoch we're measuring, they've gone up. But wait another 100,000 years, they might go down again. And therefore they won't become 100% different in frequency between Europeans and East Asians. So this is quite an interesting plot. So here's the 479 positions. Where you compare their frequency on the x axis against their intensity of selection as estimated in our study on the y axis. And all the stuff that's previously found in the literature is labeled and it looks completely atypical and weird. So the main mother load of genetic variation, the more common it is. The weaker the effect on the weaker the selection, the rarer it is, the stronger the selection estimates. And that's the common pattern you see for effect sizes affecting genome wide association studies too. Usually the common ones have very weak effect sizes. The rare ones have very strong effect sizes. And this is due to history of natural selection removing things that have big effects because there's Selection wants to reduce variation in the population once the population has hit an optimum. And so there's, like, a clearance of common variation. But the strong things that were found before, like lactase persistence or these skin color traits or various other things, these are very weird. And under recent positive selection, some of them are very common, and they're not typical of this pattern. So with all the power we have in the study. We've gotten through this weird set of variants that all have particular histories related to light being exposed to we are diets and milk and whatever, and we've gotten to the common variation that affects disease. And this has a completely different and systematic pattern that is similar to that of complex disease. In common traits. And we can actually see that the genetic variation we're measuring, the selection we're measuring is actually shaping these traits.  
Me: These are all these? Dots on the graph. These are alleles that were found in the found to be under selection or these are just in general.  
Them: These are every single dot. This includes 479 dots, and each one has a signal selection.  
Me: Okay? Got it. And just make sure I understand. You're saying look. The ones that are not on these curves, they're like under more recent selection because if they were, if they've been selected for longer, then they would be if they're driven to fixation or driven out of the gene pool, given their strong selection coefficient.  
Them: The ones that are the labeled ones are ones with absolutely massive selection coefficients, and these are, in general, the ones that have been known from the previous literature, largely.  
Me: Right. Okay?  
Them: The point of this curve is that they don't look. Functionally and statistically, like the other ones. They're like these other ones have a pattern where the more common they are, the weaker the effect, the rarer they are, the stronger effect. But that's not what you see with these ones. They're atypical. So the point of this is that with this type of study, we're actually learning about the nature of natural selection.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: In like that affects the bulk of the genome, as opposed to weird anecdotal stories like lactase persistence or pigmentation. Normally, the way people tell stories about how natural selection works in our species is they tell them based on these examples. And the point of this plot is these are completely atypical examples that have to do with skin color, right? Like, skin color is not a normal trait. It's like a reaction to people going into northern climates and not having vitamin D in their diet. And they need to synthesize vitamin D in their skin and sexual selection because people like people, their mates to be light skinned or dark. Skinned or something. It's just a very atypical trait. It's much more differentiated across populations than typical trait. And you cannot learn about the general pattern of selection in the human genome by looking at skin pigmentation or by looking at lactase persistence, or by looking at these vegetarian diet genes like fads. Or fats one, for example.  
Me: Interesting.  
Them: In the talk, I highlight weird stuff where we're looking for constant selection coefficient over time. But if you play a game where you break up the time in two time periods, you actually see reversals. So this is an example of the reversal I talked about here. These ones reversed. Some of these, and you actually see examples of reversal. So this is like a risk factor for the strongest risk factor for the autoimmune disease that affects the brain, multiple sclerosis. And it starts rising in frequency between 6,000 years after 6,000 years ago. Those are hunka gathers, farmers, step pastoralists. It shoots up to, like, 15 or 20%. But then it reverses and shoots down. And they're both highly significant. And what's happening is there's, like it's doing. Maybe it's protecting against some pathogen or something, and then something else, some other pathogen comes in, and that's bad. So this is why it's not sweeping to 100%. This variant goes up and then it goes down, and you can see that. It varies geographically. So in northern Europe, it's like the strongest selection coefficient I've ever seen, like 14% or something like this. In northern Europe, and then it shoots down. And then in southwest Europe, in places like Spain or Italy, it's a much weaker but still real selection coefficient, and it doesn't obviously shoot down. So there's geographic variation, there's temporal variation that is like, you can actually appreciate with this type of data.  
Me: When you go back to your slides, actually. And one more. So I guess like the ones that are identified are the labeled or not typical alleles. But like what is going on with the typical alleles? Is it just that they're following the usual pattern where if this election coefficient is strong then it will either be driven to fixation or out of the population? Is that like, basically saying, like, the thing you would expect is actually happening.  
Them: That's correct. The hope from studies of selection is that has always been that one of the main hopes has always been that we would obtain insight about into what the wonks call genetic architecture of complex traits, like how genetic variations come together to influence all sorts of traits we manifest biologically, like Hyde and so on. And we know if you look at phenotype wide association studies that one of the primary characteristics of these traits is that the individual contributing variants are usually rare.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: The strong effects are rare.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: We know that selection is kind of a readout for a function. And it's correlated to function. But the variants that have been identified so far in the literature, the ones that are plotted on this slide, are atypical. So now we're actually starting to see typical behavior. And it means that we actually can use these selection coefficients and this type of measurement to learn something about how typical traits are built.  
Me: It makes sense.  
Them: So we're pretty excited about that, as this is all we've done. We've made a plot like this and it's very promising. But so we look at other examples of reversal. This is the nature risk factor for tuberculosis, clinically significant tuberculosis. It also reverses two or three thousand years ago, which seems to be a very important time period when things keep reversing, it shoots. A previous study, I'd shown this one down. Based on early Ancient DNA test, but we find it goes up before, so it's presumably protecting people against something. And then, I don't know, maybe tuberculosis starts becoming endemic and it pushes it down. Here is like the major risk factor for this common disease of iron storage disorder, common in Europeans. It shoots up and then it goes down again. So you have these reversals. Here's celiac disease risk variance, Two risk factors for celiac disease, which is gluten insensitivity in Europeans. They both shoot up after 4,000 years ago. You might wonder why. There's selection for risk factors for celiac disease, and potentially they protect against something. Else we don't know. So, and then this is like a summary of what we've learned from this single variant analysis. Strong directional selection on hundreds of alleles. It's intensified, it's fluctuated. There's a website that you can go to that you can look at your favorite variant of 10 million and see what's. Happened. It's kind of an amazing website that Ali put together. And everybody should look at it. And you get these plots for whatever variant you care about. You can correlate it to all the UK Biobank traits and look at how they overlap and cross correlate to each other. You get your P values and your significances and so on. So it's like a beautiful thing. And then this is the complex trait thing. It talks about a polygenic score. This is an example for height. Height is like the measure in a huge number of people, more than 5 million people in this study from 2022 and it's just a sum of the effect size of the variant times the genotype 0, 1 or 2. And the question is, we're going to see if it changes more over time than expected by chance. And in this talk, I didn't talk more about the details. We could talk more about the details about how we test for significance, but this is pigmentation, which is obvious. It's a positive control, really. But this is the biggest effect. It's massive. 10 to the minus 74th significance. And what you see. Is Europe is depigmented over the last 10,000 years. This is known already and this is probably because of vitamin D biology and maybe because in part because of saccule selection. It's about two standard deviation effect on the scale of modern variation and these are the confidence intervals and you see they're ultra tight. And you can also draw sliding window through the data. Like 2000 year sliding window and look at what the selection strength is at each point in time. See, like, at the beginning, it's, like, on a scale of two standard deviations. On the timescale of human variation. But then there's a period of absolutely massive depigmentation in the bronze age, from 4,000 to 2,000 years, when it's actually depigmentation is really rocking and is really becoming very rapid depigmentation. Then in recent times, less, more like. So you might not know this, but like the genetic data, seeing that selection for depigmentation is particularly strong during the Bronze Age.  
Me: I think given the focus on, like this 4,000 years ago, you know what's happening such that, like, these signals are getting so much stronger.  
Them: Yeah. Or they flip. Right? Like this one.  
Me: Yeah, exactly.  
Them: This one. These. These are flipping at the same time.  
Me: So is there a good thing to read on, like, just, I don't know, Bronze Age? I mean? I'm sure not. Is there a good thing to read? What do you recommend reading about? To the extent anything is helpful in terms of just qualitatively, what's happening during the Bronze Age, is it still the first farmer's book.  
Them: Um, I don't know. There's like, um, secondary. This is sort of like the secondary products revolution. Andrew Sherat. I'm just pulling it up from the Internet. But it's like Andrew, the archaeologist Andrew Sheratt talks about this period, which is basically the Bronze Age or the perigispus preceding the Bronze Age, that then goes into the Bronze Age, when people start, like, being much more sophisticated about the use of things. So not all. You know, they start using metal, right? Like copper and then bronze, which is, like, incredible innovation. And then they start, like, not just using animals to kill and eat them, but to, like, making milk or making wool or making, you know, using them to pull plows or using them transport stuff. So it's like a massive intensification of industry and of production that's based on using animals in a very. Much more intense way and population size is completely explode, almost certainly during the Bronze Age. So, like, one of the things that was interesting I gave you. One of the links I gave you was to the Matheson and Matheson paper, Sarah Mathesonian Netherson, which was like looking at lactase persistence and amylase. And a few other things. And, like, the big conclusion from that paper is that people speculate that it's like the invention of agriculture that starts this selection. But like, in all of those cases, the big selection is Bronze Age. Like, that's when it's happening. You might think that the big change is people starting to farm, but, like, it's this massive intensification.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah.  
Them: People living close to their animals at much, much higher population densities, that really gets things going. And you see it in the biology. That's really when the selection starts massively happening. This is kind of like a biological genetic readout of the magnitude of disruption of our, you know, lives by these sorts of traits. So. These sorts of influences.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: The Bronze Age. You know, it's like when people start, you know, it's named after the widespread of bronze. It really begins in the Copper Age, just before through metal. But, you know, with bronze, people, people start. People start like bronze making bronze is very hard. The ingredients of bronze. It's not copper. Copper is one of the ingredients, but the other main copper ingredients is either arsenic or tin. And then you alloy them to make bronze, which is much, much harder and much, much better for tools. And so people start to start, like, mining it in different places. So there's not. A lot of copper mines. So they, like, would go to cypress. Cypress. The name cypress refers to copper or cupra. And so that's like a copper mine. And they would go to Cyprus and get copper out of Cyprus and a few other places there was copper. There was like, one in Afghanistan or something like this, and. Then, like, they would get tin. And the richest mine and for tin in Europe was in southwest Britain in Granola So there's like all these people from Europe going to Granola and mining tin suddenly and shifting it all around Europe and all around the Mediterranean. And so there sort of creates these long distance trade networks to pull these rare minerals or rare, you know, metals, put them together, smelt them together, and to create this, like, transformative tool that like, allows people to do all sorts of things they didn't do together. So it causes long distance linkages. Maybe this is also contributing to what we're seeing. You know, maybe diseases are. Moving with all the people moving in their ships, you know, and then there's this transition to the iron age about 3,000 years ago, which is an even better metal, but requires higher heat to make, but like irons everywhere. So, like, all the long distance trade networks break down because everybody can dig in their backyard and, like, just smell iron so you get a better, better tool. And then, like, there's all these Bronze Age civilizations, like the Hittites and the Mycenaeans. They all collapse because, like, you know, one interpretation of this is that, like, they don't need to make bronze anymore, so they could just all make it locally and, like, you know, and it's very disruptive, but that's speculative, but it's very interesting.  
Me: The Danesh University. We should. We should definitely talk about that or I feel like they'll be one of the more interesting things we talk about.  
Them: I don't know.  
Me: If there's some. I mean, I can look this up myself if nothing comes to mind. But I definitely want to talk about, like. Yeah, what. What we know about or just the recounting you gave, plus going into some tangents and details or whatever, like.  
Them: Happy to. I'm happy to. I mean, I forget exactly what we covered in our previous discussion, but there's a lot to talk. I mean, there's a lot of interesting things. And you can cut an edit, of course, if I'm just repeating something I had in my previous discussion.  
Me: And then on the Bronze Age. Yeah. If something comes up in terms of, like you mentioned, the secondary artifacts product revolution. I'll read up on that. And then if. Or maybe just in general, I'm like, I'll talk about the 11s, about what we know about changes in trade, overshoot Bronze Age and Iron Age and so forth. But if anything in particular seems relevant, just shoot me a reference that that's always super helpful.  
Them: I think that the thing that's very interesting about the selection study is that it's sort of pointing to the Bronze Age as being, like, very meaningful period. So it's this, like, objective measure right off by the ancient DNA data of, like. This is when biology is reacting very strongly. It's not as much in the Neolithic. And interestingly, despite your biases, like, I think most people, if you pull that, I pull and talk about this and, you know, you say, okay, when do you think the strut selection is going to be strongest? They think, oh, today, right? Urbanism, right. You know, like last 2,000 years, they say, there's no but. Like, you know, you see this weakening of selection right here?  
Me: Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Y. Eah.  
Them: I'll just continue here. I'm basically giving you this talk, but, like, you know, so, you know, here's selection for metabolic traits, various things that are related to type 2 diabetes. They all go down by about a standard deviation on the scale of modern variation.  
Me: Great. Super helpful.  
Them: Which is kind of amazing. And here's the sliding window analysis. And you don't see much change during the Bronze Age. That's clear. These are contrast intervals, so it looks like a constant decrease by about standard deviation on the scale of 10,000 years for all of these type 2 diabetes related traits. Here's you know, it's interesting. Like, you know, you might think. Oh, well, there's selection against body fat and body mass. Well, maybe people are thinner today than they're not, but I doubt that's true. And it's just to say that, like, the phenotype, how people manifest is not necessarily the same as the genetics. You know, we might be exposed to different types of foods today that mean that people become obese in ways that might not have been the case in the past, but the genetics has been to prevent in the direction of reduced obesity in this part of the world. So. And here's like the bipolar disease in schizophrenia. They both decrease by on the order of a standard deviation. And it's a polygenic signal, as we talked about before. And these are huge signals. And, you know, this again doesn't mean again. This is pretty constant over time. And it doesn't mean schizophrenia or bipolar disease is more common today than in the past. Like, it might be less common. Like, you know, because environmental things might make people today more crazy in various ways. I don't know. You know, but like the genetic, you know, if you transplant someone from 10,000 years ago to today there are going to other things being equal, more likely to be affected by these, these illnesses. And you know, one thing that's interesting is like, you know, maybe it was positively selective before these speculatively schizophrenia risk or bipolar disease. Like, maybe these things are related to like religious, you know, originality or, you know, shamanism. Or, you know. You know, like, being able to be mixed, you know, like. And so maybe it was positive in the past to be, like, a little bit unusual, I don't know.  
Me: Do you know the. Oh, wait. Okay, I'm looking at the Y axis. Here. I guess I don't have reference point of what one means on. On the polygenic score.  
Them: One means that the polygenic score is the sort of. It's the sketch. It's the standard deviation on the scale of modern variation.  
Me: So people 10,000 years ago, or full standard deviation, more schizo than today. That's actually quite crazy. That's a lot.  
Them: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  
Me: That's a lot. Yeah.  
Them: These are all big effects.  
Me: And I'd be curious, is your estimate that, like IQ would be on the order of a standard deviation difference between.  
Them: Yeah, that's, that's, that's, that's two slides down. So here's various measures of health. What do they call it? Health span, like, you know, rate of health decline or walking pace. That is also measured in the UK Biobank. They're very strongly genetically determined. And again, there's order, standard deviation. Effects on the scale of 10,000 years, where there's improvement in health span and here there is a Bronze Age or Early Bronze Age spike. And where there's particularly strong selection for increase in health span in this period more than today. And then here's the traits you asked about the three behavioral traits. Like IQ test score in Britain today on scale variation, household income, which is like a crazy trait. It's hard to imagine it's genetic, but it is. And number of years of school. So, like, these are again on the order of a standard deviation increase on a scale of 10,000 years.  
Me: That's so massive. That's like, literally. For iq, it's like two standard deviations, so it's like, literally.  
Them: Look at the red line. So the red line is the fit. So the red line is the selection coefficient. And the black line is the actual measured rate in our samples, so.  
Me: The difference between the red and the black. Sorry. Didn't even interrupt. Just to make sure I understand that.  
Them: The green. The green is this. Hunter gatherers of Europe. They're very low. They're three standard deviations. Different.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: The orange are the farmers. They're the same as today. The step that store list are one below today. In this trade. So this is not necessarily selection, although probably is, actually. It's just that these are quite different populations genetically. Starting. So the reason this curve is basically affected by these people. And like, the ancestry here and people today is about like 50% or 40% steadfast store list, 40 or 50%. Farmers and 10% these people. So over here, the ancestry is very different from over here because it's only 10% that.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Year. It's not that. You know, this curve is reflecting the particular people we happen to have in this study.  
Me: I see.  
Them: And which is changing over time. This red curve is corrected and it's showing the rate at which this crate has been blowing in the same direction at every point in time. And that's the actual test is based on whether the red line has a slope of non zero. And so what you can learn from this is both that 10,000 years ago, the hunter gatherers had very low predicted IQ on the scale of modern variation. That's real. But also that there's been consistent selection to increase this value. Whether you have DNA from this source source or this source or this source. That's what the red line is telling. You.  
Me: Got it. Yeah. Got it. Okay. And then. I guess.  
Them: And then again, there's a Bronze Age effect. So, for example, like, there's no selection for IQ, it's zero in the last 2000 years. It's all in the bronze age.  
Me: What do you make of the collective brain's hypothesis? And like there's been selection against. Intelligence in the last couple thousand years, as society has become more specialized and complex.  
Them: It's possible.  
Me: But it doesn't seem that, like, compatible with the data.  
Them: It could be compatible. I mean, you know, there's. There's very little. There's very little selection over here.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: You know, like, also, you know, like, you know, like, I don't know how important intelligence is. If you look like read the Bible, they don't mention intelligence or proxies for intelligence. They, you know, mentioned. Being God fearing or being strong or like, you know, like, you know, they occasionally mention sort of nasty, clever people like Jacob or something like this, but like, you know, you don't, you don't in almost any of the ancient, you know, in the Greek mythology and most mythologies, you don't sort of this. Kind of valuation we have on intelligence is really a very recent value. You might argue that in certain cultures it's valued, but the general rule in human societies is that this is like, not a valuable, not as valuable value to trade as we place it on now.  
Me: I guess it's a value in terms of, like, culturally valued. Another in terms of like, does it make you more likely to have kids?  
Them: Yeah, it may not make mcel more likely to have kids right now. Like, you know, people who have go to school longer have fewer kids.  
Me: Which is interesting. Yeah. Okay, so just to make sure, the methodology here. I guess I don't understand the straight line, because if you're showing that the selection coefficient has been shifting over time, What to make of the red straight line.  
Them: The red straight line is just a fit to this mean selection coefficient estimated from external machinery. That's not shown on the plot. It's not a regression line.  
Me: Yeah, yeah, makes sense.  
Them: So there is a test. There's a formal test under lock under this machine.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: There is a formal test by Aqari that looks to see whether these there's evidence or selection. Now, the fact that the polygenic score for intelligence in modern day British is jumping around over time. Could just be an artifact of the fact that these three groups start with different proportions of it, and the balance of ancestry is changing over time. We also run under the hood a test for whether these changes are statistically significant and we get an estimate. And that's what you're seeing here. These are these estimates of selection coefficient at each point in time done properly. So basically, this is the derivative correcting for ancestry. And this is actually a more interesting number than these numbers in some ways.  
Me: Makes sense. Yeah.  
Them: And at least for determining whether a selection is active.  
Me: Yeah. Makes sense.  
Them: So. You know, there's 100 traits that show up. It's not just the ones I showed you. It's like tobacco use and, like, you know, age it for sexual intercourse and, like, how much cheese you eat and like, adhd. Like, they're all very strongly selected. And like, whether you snore. Your lung capacity. You know, there's 100 of these, 560 or three traits that we tested show clear signals of selection in a polygenic sense. And then. You know, this is like trying to check that this is real. So what we did is we were especially worried or concerned or wondering about the educational attainment scores where we and so what we did is we measured the effect a number of years of school in gwas and East Asians and Chinese. So you've got effect sizes on, like, the same 10 million positions, but they're measured in East Asians. And there's, like, no way, if it's not real, that these are going to be correlated to selection trajectories in West Eurasians, who have had a completely independent history for the last 10,000 or 30 or 40,000 years from East Asians. But you look at the signal when you measure the effect sizes. In Europeans, it's five or six sigma. You look at the signal when you measure the effect size. In East Asians, it's five or six sigma. It's kind of like this can't happen by chance. It really. It's a real effect. And then like if you also do a study where you rep, you do a genome wide association study in sibling pairs, so there can't be population structure because two siblings have the same parents, you also replicate. And then an important thing to realize, and we should talk about this if we cover these cognitive performance traits in our discussion is that these make no sense in prehistoric societies. Like people didn't take IQ tests, people didn't go to school, people didn't have wealth. And what was actually being subject to selection is unclear. If you look at the correlation of these traits, like there's very strong correlation of years of schooling, zero. Point 82 to household income. This is not ancient today, this is just the GWAS data, but it's also pretty strongly correlated to, like, health decline. You know, and also correlated to, like, smoking status. And like this top triangle and even, like, body fat percentage, right, is substantially correlated to years of schooling. So, like, you really should not assume this is selection for intelligence. It could be selection for, like, executive function or something, right? Or, you know, like. Or, you know, age at which people decide to have kids for the first time, which might be. So it's like. It's not clear what was being selected in the past, but it is clear that today it manifests in these ways. You know?  
Me: Can we go back? Once. I'm a little confused. Machine selection. Let me make sure I'm capturing this correctly. It's saying, like, oh. Like you. You already knew that in the European data, the locations which were under selection were enriched for. Enriched for like GWAS educational attainment. Sites. And then you were saying, like, oh, well, but they're also enriched in East Asians.  
Them: So there's no East Asian GWAS selection study here. There's only one selection study done in Europeans and Middle Easterners. But you can measure the game. Here is we're correlating effect size measurements in a gwas. To the selection trajectories. And most of our analyses up to this point have been effect size estimates in Europeans. But now we're playing a game where we're switching the effect size estimates from Europeans in liwas to East Asian. And you might think that, you know, maybe these signals we're seeing, like these. Are due to like some kind of weird population structure artifact where like, the signal is correlated to like uncorrected substructure and genome wide association studies, which is also corrected to European population history. But like, East Asians don't have the same history in the last 30,000 years. It's not doing it. And then. This is not in our paper, but we've now done an East Asian scan. It's much worse than our West Eurasian scan. It's about the same time period. It has a tenth of the samples. They're really scattered all over east asia. We find 40 signals, not 479 because. Of the much smaller sample size and less focused trajectory. But the super interesting thing is that the signals, like, if you look at the signals in East Asia, they're positively correlated strongly to the ones in Western Asia. They're moving in the same direction. If you look at the ones in West Eurasia, they're positively correlated even.06a to the ones in East Asia. So, like the same variants inherited from the common ancestral African population are moving in the same direction, probably due to agriculture and Bronze Age and pathogen exposure at the same type, you see the same enrichment.  
Me: Interesting.  
Them: You know, immune, strongest. Psychiatric behavioral weakest. In East Asia. Like, this is body mass index obesity. This is the East Asian trajectory. This is the West Eurasian tree luxury. Here's the 452 polygenic scores. They're hugely correlated in terms of their selection signal. Like everything, not just like we talked about with years of schooling, but like everything except for. Pigmentation. It looks like Eustachians didn't depigment over the last 10,000 years. And the light pigmentation in East Asians is earlier. It looks like these groups both got exposed to similar selection pressures. Completely independently due to similar cultural transitions. And the genome reacted in the same way at the same positions. Due to some kind of convergent evolution to respond to these new pressures, people experience higher densities, immune exposures to particular pathogens.  
Me: You know, it'd be really fascinating. Already. This is crazy. But if in the new world, I'm sure at some point you'll do it, but if it ends up being the same, it's just like, oh, this is like, this is not even. I mean, you were correcting for gene flow already, but like, you were correcting you in for. Like, all kinds of weird contingencies of history. If you do the New World and if you see. I mean, I guess they didn't have a. They were using obsidian, so they didn't have a Bronze Age, but, like, they did have, you know, cities with hundreds of thousands of people. It would be interesting to see. Like what?  
Them: Yeah, we're going to do that.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: We're going to do that. It's actually eminently possible. And, like, there's actually. In the new world, there's lots of different. There's lots of. It's a great idea and, you know, like, one wants to do this in different places, so it's eminently doable and. For example, the Maya region of the Yucatan Peninsula, where there's, like, rich data. And in Peru, for example, both of these are deep agriculture. You know, agriculture is almost as old in the Americas as it is. As it is in the Old World. It goes back 9,000 years. It's, like, amazing. And like, you know, if it's, you know, if it's agriculture, you should see it. And there's also places we have lots of data from in the Americas which are actually never exposed to agriculture, you know, Southeast Brazil, for example. And you could actually also do this study only in Europeans. But before department gets there because there's hundreds of individuals prior to 8,000 years ago. And, like, you know, a thing to do would be to see if, like, you know. You know, I guess a prediction might be that, like, it's completely different what's being selected.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: And maybe much, much less selection. So, like, it would be very, very interesting. Like, repeat this in the Americas. Like, repeating any stage is very interesting because. But, you know, there's a shared pathogen load because, like, pathogens are moving back and forth and there's some that share technology because, like, bronze and all sorts of things are moving back and forth across Eurasia.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: But, you know, potentially just as interesting as what we're talking about is like doing comparative analysis.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah. Okay, this is extremely helpful. Can you. Would you mind sharing the PowerPoint with me?  
Them: I'm going to share with you the PowerPoint and the most up to date version of the paper. So let me.  
Me: Perfect.  
Them: So first thing is, I'm going to send you an email with the PowerPoint.  
Me: Tower.  
Them: PowerPoint, and I'm just going to attach to it the PowerPoint. Which is the arc I gave two days ago in Copenhagen. It should go. That was the first thing. And then second one is, I'm going to send you the up to date version of the paper. Because you are using incorrect numbers because up to date thing. So I will find the correct version of the paper. And the correct version of the paper is. Let's see if I can find it. Okay, so this is like nearly done. This is like a pretty up to date version of the paper. We're like, just in these days. Why is my Dropbox not behaving properly? Okay. I'm going to see if I can send you this attachment. This might not work. It might be too big. Okay, Paper. Let me tell before I go off. Let me give you a copy of this page. Tell me if this page comes through.  
Me: Great. And as you're doing that, I'm thinking through an idea, which is, should we. Get a PowerPoint? Would it make more sense to do this as. I mean, we could do it, and we could have the DP set up some sort of, like, projector or something. Where we have a conversation sort of similar to this one, where you're going through the talk. And as you're going through the talk, I'm interrupting and, like, asking questions and what's going on and the reason.  
Them: If you want. We can do that.  
Me: Yeah, I'm sorry. That's what I'm trying to think through Live, if that's going to be the best format, because the reason to do it is something like, it's already so well organized, and I think from the audience's perspective of, like, actually understanding the science, it's good. To just, like, get it the way you would explain it to another scientist or to the community, and then so that they have the full context, and then it's also well organized for, like, just as we were doing right now. About what's going on here. Doesn't that imply X? What would happen if Y? And so actually, that makes me think maybe we should do it that way. And then. And then I can, like, jump in with questions and everything.  
Them: Yeah, we could do that. I mean, it's. It's. This is pretty hardcore stuff, and I think we can explain it. And discuss it, but it is pretty hardcore. And I think it's very, very, very, very interesting if understood. And I think your audience can understand it, but it is hardcore. So it may be helpful to have the scaffolding of slides, although, you know, you're the judge of whether you want to expose your, your people to a slide presentation.  
Me: Yeah, I think. Let me. Let me think on it and then think about it from a videography and everything perspective. But regardless of that, it sounds like the next time that given the flight cancellation, that will make sense to the interview is Wednesday at 1:30. And so.  
Them: Is that when we're doing it?  
Me: Yeah. Or it sounds like that's when you're next available, after Monday.  
Them: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah Tuesday Tuesdays are right off Given other things.  
Me: Okay? Yeah. Great. So sweet. Okay, so let's do it Wednesday at 1:30. And then, you know what? Let me just confirm with my videographer and just confirm that. But, yeah, that's sort of the 10 out of plan.  
Them: Okay?  
Me: Now. I'll send you an updated invite.  
Them: So, like 1:30 to 4:30 or something?  
Me: Yeah, exactly. I'm going to just update it on the calendar.  
Them: Okay? Well, once you update it, I will move around various other things to make that work.  
Me: Okay, why don't you hold off on that? Let me just double check with the videographer that. That.  
Them: Well, I've just written it as tentative. I will hold off on that. Can you tell me whether you've got the paper?  
Me: Will go ahead. Great. Yeah, I got the paper.  
Them: Okay?  
Me: I got a zip file, and I'm sure it contains the stuff in it.  
Them: Perfect. Yeah.  
Me: Okay? Great.  
Them: Okay?  
Me: Okay. Amazing. Super helpful.  
Them: Talk to you soon. I lost the image of you again, but goodbye.  
Me: Yeah. All right. See ya. Bye, david. 